---
title: "Thoughts About Practice"
author: "Rex Walters"
date: 2019-01-20T14:48:47-08:00
tags: [practice]
draft: false
---

Nobody improves without practice, **regular** practice. But too many people (myself included) unconciously start to dread (and thus avoid) their practice sessions. I believe this happens for just two reasons: *motivation* and *time*.
<!--more-->

It's all too easy to despair about your lack of progress (trust me, we've all been there).  I also know full well how "life intrudes." We all lead busy lives with lots of things competing for our time. It seems you're always in the middle of something that gets in the way: "I just can't find the time to even pick up the instrument for a few minutes."

I've found a few things that help with both issues, however.

## Motivation

First of all, nobody but a masochist will practice regularly if they don't find their practice sessions at least a little bit enjoyable. It's important to find as many ways as possible to make practice as easy and **pleasurable** as possible.

### Motivation principle #1: Play vs. practice

One thing practice should never be, however, is relaxing. If you aren't pushing yourself in some way, you simply aren't practicing. Practice takes focus and effort.

Sitting on the couch and mindlessly noodling while watching TV isn't practice, it's playing. It may not be completely without value (your body will may get some mechanical benefit from familiarity and constant contact/exercise on the instrument) but without some sort of structure its inefficient at best, and it's definitely not practice.

Play, of course, is always going to be more fun than practice. It's perfectly valid to reward yourself with *play* before, after, or even instead of practice. It's normal, in fact. We all do it. But don't get confused: *playing* isn't *practicing* and you need practice to improve.

Even five minutes of focus and pushing suffices for an individual practice session.

The "pushing" can be mental or it can be physical, and you should strive to balance the two. Some days it just feels like your brain can't get out of first gear. Good day to "push" your physical capabilities and practice technique. Other days you may just not want to even look at the metronome. Those may be good days to "push" your brain and work on theory.

Don't get me wrong: Playing before or after practice (even mindless sofa noodling) is a great thing! You should never feel guilty if your play/practice ratio is weighted much heavier on the play side. It's even okay to skip practice altogether some days if you just can't motivate yourself to do anything other than play (after all, the whole point of the pursuit for amateurs is to have fun).

Instead of guilt, you should be proud of yourself if you even picked up the guitar on any given day, and you should be particularly proud if you spend any time at all actually practicing. (You can, and probably even should, reward yourself somehow, if only with a beverage or piece of candy.)

Try, however, to get in at least a few minutes of focused practice in along with your play, almost every single day. Five minutes a day for four our five days per week is **way** better than a multi-hour marathon session every few weeks.

### Motivation principle #2: Balance and bite-sized chunks

Engineers like myself tend to be a bit obsessive. Once we set ourselves to a task, we focus on it almost to the exclusion of everything else. Worse, we tend to set ourselves absurdly over-aggressive goals. Without actually saying or writing it down, we'll think something as silly as "I want to learn to play [whatever song]. I'll keep practicing until it sounds just like [whatever world-class professional] on the record." Then we'll mono-maniacally practice that and only that for the next several days, weeks, or months until we succeed or are ready to give up the instrument.

One trick I've found useful to avoid this problem is to divide all of my practice exercises into one of five categories, what I call the "five T's":

* Tunes/repertoire
* Theory
* Technique/dexterity/chops
* Timing/rhythm/groove
* Tones/ear-training

All of these overlap to some degree. Theory overlaps everything: it underlies all music (if only to provide a way to think and talk about what's going on). Technique and timing are also very closely related. You may also need to improve your chops in order to play a particular tune. Still, dividing things up this way helps me  ensure my practice time is balanced, that I'm working on all of the areas regularly and with some semblance of balance.

I try to plan out my practice sessions somewhat equally over all these areas, but on any given day I may well call an audible. If I don't particularly feel like learning a song, I may work on something more theoretical: harmony and triads, a particular scale or mode, etc. If I'm tired and don't feel up to brain work *or* difficult fingerboard exercises, I'll put on a metronome or drum loop and just try to improvise a groove of some sort (this [YouTube Video by Guitargate](https://youtu.be/ROKXgwshKwM) is a great example of this kind of practice).

Let's take a practical example. Let's say you'd like to learn [the song Blackbird by the Beatles](https://www.guitardownunder.com/_scores/blackbird.pdf). Beginners may think this is a reasonable short-term goal, but I'd consider it a higher-level medium or long term goal. Learning an entire song in one swell foop is almost certainly **not** a reasonable goal for a single beginner's practice session!

The mono-maniacal approach is to find the tab, start at bar 1 every session for weeks on end, play from the beginning until you make a mistake, then restart from the beginning. Inevitably, you'll find after a few weeks that you've practiced the first few bars a bazillion times but have yet to reach the end of the song.

It's a terrible way to practice, but sadly it's also the most common.

Far, far better would be to set a schedule for yourself and force yourself to stick to it. Break the song up into bite-sized sections: maybe bars 1-4 during the first session, 5-8 the next, and so on (there are 35 bars in the tab linked to above). If nothing else, this ensures you give equal time to every section (unlike always starting from the beginning). After getting through the whole song, you'll know where the more difficult sections are and where to spend the remainder of your time. The idea is to practice what you don't know or what you struggle with, not to keep practicing what you already know!

Even better is to break up and extend your practice sessions using the five T's. In addition to just learning the Tune, add some relevant things from the other T's:

For technique practice you might want to spend some time on fingerpicking in general (dexterity exercises or whatever).

For theory (the song's in G) you may want to figure out the chords in the harmonized G Major scale, or figure out why there's an A7 (a major chord) in bar 5 even though the diatonic chord in the key of G Major is A minor.

For ear training, you may put on the record, pausing occasionally to see if you can recognize and pick out some of the intervals that Paul is playing.

Some days you may only work on one of the T's, others may touch on all of them.

The point is to attack the higher level goal (learning the song) from multiple angles and using bite-sized chunks. You'll make better progress, what you learn will be more applicable to the rest of your playing, and you should find the whole process far less frustrating.

### Motivation #3: Squirrel! (Getting overwhelmed with distractions)

This is a relatively new problem: between online videos, ebooks, websites, apps, remote-learning, etc., there are now so many great sources of (often free) music education that you can literally waste *hours* just bouncing from topic to topic and instructor to instructor. I'm as guilty as anyone of watching YouTube video after YouTube video from incredibly gifted guitar instructors.

We've all been there. You see one cool video and excitedly try the exercise/whatever. Then you watch another one, and another, and another. Down the rabbit hole you go.

Eventually you become almost paralyzed. Which of all these useful looking topics should you be practicing?!

The unhelpful, but correct answer, of course, is **any or all of them**.

A slightly better answer is: whichever you've already started, but haven't yet mastered.

I'll get to what I think is the bet answer in a bit, but my advice is to seek out and enjoy every possible video/app/website/whatever that interests you. There is absolutely no reason to feel guilty. If you follow my advice below, you won't get overwhelmed.

Everything in music is interrelated, and you never know what might make things "click" for you. Even though some of the content I've seen online is a bit dubious (like this site!) it might provide the spark you need to learn some aspect of making music on the instrument. The content may be technically "wrong" but if you keep studying you'll eventually recognize the mistake, and if it helps you make music, who cares?

Just remember that playing videos or whatever isn't practice.

So how does one avoid becoming overwhelmed?

I finally took an old school approach: a simple written list of no more than five things to practice.

I let myself watch whatever content I want, but before I take up any valuable practice time with the latest cool video or whatever, I look at my list. If it's currently shorter than five items, I usually just add the new thing to the list.

If there are already five items, I ask myself if I want to practice the new thing more than anything currently there. Sometimes I've come close to mastering something so I don't feel guilty replacing it on the list. Other times, an item no longer "sparks joy" in me as Marie Kondo would say, so I drop it and put the new thing in its place.

Usually, though, I realize I've already got plenty to work on, so I just bookmark the content and avoid the distraction.

I do try to balance the "five T's" somewhat. If most of the five items are overly focused in one area, I'm more likely to replace one item with something in a different area.

As I write this, the whiteboard in my practice area currently has the following five items written on it. These are **not** in any sort of priority order &mdash; I work on what I want when I want:

* Reading. [Practice reading sheet music.]
* Vamps. [A Frank Vignola course I'm following online: [Vamps Jams & Improvisation](https://truefire.com/c190)]
* Pentatonics on 3 strings. [Forcing myself to break out of boxes.]
* Goodrick modes. [The first exercises in Mick Goodrick's classic [The Advancing Guitarist](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B00CAYOI3Y/ref=cm_sw_em_r_mt_dp_U_HCtrCb7QXY4PQ)]
* Harmonize C Major (Triads all positions, all string sets)

Lately, I've been spending most of my practice sessions on the last item. All of these are "big" topics with several days worth of exercises each. Sometimes an item might be small, something that can be mastered in just a session or two. Other times they might be impossibly large, requiring years of study.

It's hard to stay disciplined. As I look at my list, I realize I've strayed a bit the past few practice sessions, especially with the third item. I also haven't practiced everything on this list this week. But the important thing is that the list isn't growing, and it's a conscious decision when I take something off the list. I'll get back to the things I want to study for sure.

It's important to **write the list down** and display it prominently near your practice area. Don't kid yourself into thinking "It's a short list &mdash; I can remember it without writing it down." Trust me, you won't.


### Motivation #4: Positive reinforcement &mdash; Seeing progress

We are all prey to negative thoughts: "I suck, and I'm just not getting any better." Progress can be so slow sometimes that you aren't even aware that you're improving.

Attitude is incredibly important. You really shouldn't let those thoughts creep in. One thing that helps is to celebrate your successes, no matter how trivial.

This sounds like the silliest kumbaya, self-help crapola imaginable (exactly the kind of thing engineers despise) but it really does work: Celebrate the most trivial thing possible, *attendance*. Post a multi-month calendar somewhere near your practice area, and every single day you practice *at all*, even for just a few minutes, put a big red X through that day.

Believe it or not, it really works. Your brain gets the tiniest little hit of dopamine every time you cross out another day. You get surprisingly competitive with yourself, too, not wanting to break a continuous streak. It really starts to bother you when you see more than a day or two without a red X. Seriously, this one stupid human trick increased the regularity of my practice more than anything else I've done.

The other thing that helps is to record yourself performing different songs or exercises periodically, *and keep the recordings*. The first time you play a recording you just made, trust me, every instinct in your body will scream out to delete it as quickly as possible! There is *nothing* as horrifying as hearing every mistake you just made preserved for posterity. It's humiliating!

How is this motivational? Simple: every now and then play back an older recording, or make a new recording of the same song or exercise and then compare. It's very easy to lose track of how much improvement you've made with incredibly small incremental gains, but recordings just don't lie.

Shortly after writing this, I pulled out my phone and played back some old recordings I'd made of myself. Most of them were somewhat laughable &mdash; I've improved considerably. Some of the actual songs I'd recorded, though, surprised me the other way. I've since forgotten how to play those songs, and my playing doesn't actually sound that bad to me (far better than I remembered it sounding when I recorded it). That's also a motivation win!

### Motivation #5: Removing impediments

I suggest approaching practice as a sort of mini-war: Everything in your life is constantly trying it's damndest to prevent you from practicing. That's the enemy. Your job is to eliminate every possible excuse and impediment to practicing.

We want to make practicing falling-off-a-log easy. The ideal is to make it easier to practice than not. Since most of us might get looks if we went to work with a guitar strapped to our backs, that might be an unattainable goal, but the closer we can get to that ideal, the better.

Examples of this include:

* Keeping your guitar out of its case on a stand or hanging on the wall.

* Maintaining a dedicated practice area (just a corner of a room suffices) with everything you need out and ready to use: stool, guitar, timer, metronome, notebook, tripod, computer/tablet, etc.

* Everything cabled and powered off the same switch.

If you need to unpack anything, flip more than one switch, or plug in more than one cable in order to play, or if you have to root around to find a pen and paper to write on, you're a million times less likely to even start a practice session. It's *way* too easy to blow off a practice session for the silliest little impediment!

One caution: I included a computer/tablet in the list of stuff to keep nearby. I included them because they can be invaluable for backing tracks or whatever, but beware of the distractions and impediments they can cause. If there is any way to turn off notifications and alerts, do so. Fight the desire to surf the web or check email &mdash; that's not practice!

## Time

The other huge impediment to quality practice, of course, is *time*, or, more specifically, lack of it. None of us, rich or poor, working or retired, get more than 24 hours in a day, and we all have things other than guitar competing for that time.

### Time Principle 1: How much time?

My advice is to set *realistic* expectations out the gate. It's easy to set yourself up for failure with an aggressive time goal. Few things are as demotivating as the feeling of "I'm so far behind". Behind what? Remember that at one point you couldn't play *at all*. You're usually the only one setting expectations on yourself: it pays to make them easily achievable.

Not everyone even has an hour or more per day to dedicate to the guitar. Fewer still can remain motivated while spending that much time with the instrument. On the other hand, it's impossible to make significant progress if you can only dedicate an hour or two every, say, third weekend. *Regular*, near-daily practice is by far the best way to improve.

The more daily practice time you can dedicate, of course, the faster your progress will be, but even five minutes a day three or four times a week (with maybe longer periods every week or two) is more than sufficient. Five minutes a day, three days a week is roughly a bazillion times better than 30 minutes every other week. (They do need to be five by-the-clock, focused, efficient, dedicated, distraction-free minutes each day, though.)

So how do you find five to thirty minutes a day to practice?

Five minutes usually isn't that hard for anyone to find. Everyone, no matter how busy, usually has at least that much slack time somewhere during their day. At the very least, five minutes less sleep never killed anyone. But **you make time for the things you care most about**. Everyone, even professionals dependent on the instrument for their livelihood have things in their life more important than guitar. There is **no** reason to artificially stress about not spending enough time practicing.

So spend a few minutes thinking back to how you spent your day yesterday, the day prior, and for the past few weeks. Rank the importance of guitar to those things. It may well be that by your own personal assessment, guitar is less important than all of them to you, and you wouldn't be willing to shorten any of them by even five minutes.

If that's the case, don't feel bad about putting the guitar back in its case for a while, and consider taking it back up again when you have more time.

If, like most of us, you remember some time spent on things that you'd rather have spent practicing (or playing!) the guitar, then think of ways to captialize on that time.

### Time Principle 2: Time of day

Divide up your typical day into three segments: morning, mid-day, evening. Ask yourself two questions (be completely honest with yourself!):

1. Which of these segments is more realistic to find time to practice?

2. In the absence of any other constraints, which segment would I prefer to use for practice?

Ignore weekdays vs. weekends for the moment. We're all different. Some have more energy in the mornings, other at night. If other constraints make it impossible to practice during your preferred segment, though, some practice is far better than no practice.

Next, spend a moment to think of any specific action you make almost every single day during your preferred segment. Maybe it's making a cup of coffee. Maybe it's picking-up or returning your car-keys to a tray or hook. Try to find something where you can afford to spend a few extra minutes on the task. Its good if it's something pleasurable like coffee. It's even better if it's something you dislike, like washing dishes. Ideally, it's something you do almost every single day.

That's your trigger.

We are **not** going to associate the trigger with practice! That's way too big and too much effort. Instead, we'll associate it with something far smaller and easier: tuning your guitar. In my case, my trigger is putting a K-Cup in my coffee maker.

Every time I make coffee in the morning (my preferred segment) I go and tune up (or at least pick up) the guitar while it's brewing. Almost invariably, when the coffee is ready I head back into my practice area and ponder my notebook/practice-log while I enjoy the coffee. That often as not leads to at least a few minutes of practice. *But it doesn't matter whether I practice or not.* All that matters is that I tune the guitar like Pavlov's dog whenever I start making coffee.

Seriously: I can't fill the coffee maker any more without at least thinking of guitar. It's a stupid pet trick brain hack, but it works.

## Time 3: The squishy nature of time (and the two magic tools)

You may think "five minutes" sounds like too short a time to accomplish anything useful. Far from it. In fact it's often too long: I frequently practice for much shorter intervals (three minutes is my preferred interval for many exercises).

It needs to be 100% focused, active time with no distractions, snacking or email, though. The only effective way I know to accomplish this is with the first magic tool: an egg timer. Just looking at a wall clock doesn't work. The timer on your smartphone will work in a pinch, but I prefer an old fashioned kitchen timer (they are cheap enough).

Decide on the drill or exercise you're going to perform, set the timer for three minutes, and go. You'll swear the bell must be broken sometimes! Three minutes can be an *unbelievably* long time.

Obviously, if you can get two, three, or ten different three-minute drills into a single practice session you progress faster than if you can only do one, but who cares? When precisely do you need to get better, and by how much? Does it really matter if it takes you a month to learn something instead of a few days? A year?

Seriously, an awful lot can be accomplished with just one three-minute drill a day for three or more days per week.

There is one more magic tool to control time: the metronome.

A metronome has at least three very different uses:


* It's useful for learning to subdivide a beat and feel a groove. Basically, you can use a metronome as a standby for an actual drummer.

* Most commonly, it's useful for building speed. You start practicing something at a slow tempo, then gradually increase the tempo when you can play through the exercise without mistakes.

* It's the ultimate test proctor (and reality check). You may **think** you've learned a lick, chord sequence, or whatever, and can play it well, but there is nothing like a metronome to prove just how wrong you are.

It's the latter two that I'd like to focus on here, especially in conjunction with a kitchen timer.

Let's say your an absolute beginner, still struggling to switch between G, C, and D chords in open position. A great way to practice is to set the egg timer for three minutes, the metronome to a slow tempo (say 60 BPM) and practice switching chords every fourth beat. As it gets easier from session to session, day to day, try every third beat, every second beat, or every beat. Then start increasing the tempo.

This works for almost any exercise. Today, I was working on haromonizing the C major scale with triads, without moving my hand more than a fret or two: C, Dm, Em, F, G, Am, Bdim. First starting with C in root position, then 1st inversion, then 2nd inversion. On strings 1/2/3, then 2/3/4, then 3/4/5, then 4/5/6. Then different keys!

Each time, I'd first work through it rubato (out of time, no metronome). When I thought I had it down, I'd pull out the metronome and discover I didn't know it as well as I thought. Those beats just don't stop! It's *hard* to keep up. Believe me: three minutes can seem an eternity with this sort of exercise. But it can be unbelievably satisfying when you finally complete an exercise in time after a several days of practice, three minutes at a time!
